---
title: Gatsby Days NYC
date: '2019-05-06'
---

Today I had the privilege of attending Gatsby Days NYC hosted by the good folks over at Gatsby JS. If you aren’t familiar with Gatsby, it is a React framework that is used to build Progressive Web Apps that are served to static assets. I highly recommend checking out the tutorial on their <a href = "https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/" target="_blank">amazing docs.</a>.

I first learned about Gatsby earlier this year when I built the first version of this blog! I knew I wanted to start blogging about my experience in web development and I also knew that I didn’t want to go back to something like wordpress. I also did not want to post on popular blog sites at that time. I looked up different ways to build your own blog, and came across Gatsby. I instantly fell in love with how easy they made it to learn and use two things that were completely foreign to me at the time: React and GraphQL. I am very happy to have gotten that initial introduction to it as it introduced me to a tech stack that I have since fallen in love with and am hoping to use professionally. 

So what did I learn about today at Gatsby Days NYC? Well, I learned that I get really tired when I’m fasting and and can’t enjoy what looks like some delicious food. Once I got over that though and focused on the conference itself I was fine. We had a kick off with the legendary Jason Lengstorf, who’s amazing streams are what taught me the basics of using Gatsby. We dove into a few amazing things about Gatsby themes, some cool things on the roadmap, and an awesome preview of...er… Gatsby Preview. This is absolutely one of their cooler products, it allows you to live preview the site as you edit the content on on a CMS like Contentful or Sanity. Makes it super useful for people on marketing or content teams to be able to edit the site and see their changes without needed to harass a Front End developer. 

Halfway through the day we had break out sessions that were called “Unconference” sessions. The team crowdsourced topics that everyone wanted to discuss and we broke into specific groups that covered what we were interested in. I found this amazing and very helpful, allowed for the crowd to control part of the information being given at the conference itself. I attended two breakout sessions, one being how to build beautiful sites, and the other being how to edit the GraphQL schema on Gatsby. This coupled with a later talk on making Gatsby pages dynamic with Apollo Client, has me very excited to put out some new content with this stack very soon. 

I know for a fact that what I learned is going to be applied to a photography portfolio I am working on for Munlite Photography. Full disclosure this company is run by my wife, but a client is a client! I am very much looking forward to playing with themes as I hope to market my web development skills if this goes well to other Photographers and creative art folks who may need a website built. Having Gatsby themes in place for working in similar contexts for websites sounds like an absolute game changer. I’ll need to look further into themes and see how best to use them since today was more of just an overall introduction. 

Overall I loved learning more about Gatsby today, this was the first tech conference I’ve attended as my last events were all hackathons. It was a nice change of pace to focus more on just straight learning. I will be attending Full Stack Conference next week in New York and thankfully did not have to pay the very pricey $1000 to attend. I will be there as a volunteer and helping to make the conference a success. Let me know if you will be there! 