---
title: HackFest 2019
date: '2019-04-29'
---

This past weekend I attended the hackfest 2019 hackathon (formerly Hackchella). It was a wonderful experience that granted me a lot of great networking opportunities and the workshops held were top notch! The hackathon was created by Enza Academy and was held at the Microsoft Office in New York City. I spent the majority of my weekend there and loved every moment of it.

The main thing that truly stood out for me was the level of diversity in both the staff and everyone who was in attendance. The staff and panels were filled with people of color, women, and was overall a very inspiring group of people. I was given the chance to attend workshops on Azure, Coding Interview Workshop (led by a graduate from my high school), as well as an amazing diversity in tech panel. I know for a fact my experience here will be following me through my own journey in tech. 

Hackfest also had a block of time on Saturday dedicated to networking with a few large companies. I was able to speak with engineers and product managers from Microsoft, Facebook, and VMware. Connecting with and learning from all of these individuals was a wonderful experience. I learned about the journey others faced in getting their first job in tech, this was especially helpful since I am also looking for my first full-time job as a Web Developer. It gave me the boost I needed to keep going and continue with my workflow. Over the past few months, I’ve grown a huge passion for web development and attending this event has seemed to only just ignite that passion even further. 

In the midst of all of these panels, this was, of course, a hackathon, I joined a group of people working on building a social media platform for nonprofits in third world countries. While we were not able to finish within the weekend, I was still grateful for the additional experience I gained working with another team. Throughout my past hackathon and Boot Camp experiences, I’ve always loved working in group projects and teams. There is always something to learn from another person no matter what everyone’s skill level is, as long as you take the time to just listen. During my time hacking away with my group this weekend I learned a little more about Redux, Material UI, and improved my skills with PostgreSQL. I even met a senior engineer from MongoDB who provided some mentorship for myself and other team members as we hacked through our project. 

Something I’ve believed in for quite some time, and something that was reiterated throughout the hackathon: teaching something is the best way to learn about it. I got the opportunity to go over React with some group members and even give a small introduction to React to others I met outside of my group. I also gave others some tips and tricks on using Git and Github. This allowed me to sharpen my own skills in these respective technologies even further. There were a couple of moments I had finished explaining how to properly push and merge code that I realized, wow I did not actually know this myself a few months ago. These are the types of moments that make hackathons and tech meetups truly worth your time, it develops you as a person and as a software engineer. 

Attending this hackathon was part of my own custom #100DayofCode challenge. I will be making a separate post about my full challenge details and the goals I have listed for myself. I am looking forward to a Gatsby JS conference next week and FullStack NYC 2019 the week after, where I will be volunteering my time to help make the conference a success and of course, learning from some great speakers. These are the steps I’m taking to transition full time to a career in web development and I thank all of you reading this for also being part of that journey. 

If you enjoy this blog post and more please share this link and follow me on twitter for more updates! 
