---
slug: "/hello-world"
date: "2019-01-10"
title: "Hello World"
---


# An Introduction

Hello world, my name is Rahat and I'm an aspiring Full Stack Web Developer. Is aspiring the right word? I hope it is because I'm not going to change it now, I like the way it sounds. I created this blog from scratch using React, GraphQL, and Gatsby. Prior to me working on this blog I had zero experience with GraphQL and Gatsby and had only made one React component. So it was definitely a learning experience with a lot of "oh fuck" moments. I'll document my process in another blog post if anyone is interested. I will say; however, that I'm looking forward to making some improvements on it and adding new features as I learn more about these and other technologies!

I started taking coding seriously when I started a Full Stack Web Development Bootcamp at Columbia University. I've taken college courses and taught myself skills prior to it but, this is what really ignited the fire in me to take my skills to the next level. With that said, I'm still honing my craft. I want to blog about some of the harder things I learn in the hopes that I solidify my knowledge and help out others starting out just like me.

I aim to blog once or twice a week. My next blog will be entirely on higher order functions in JavaScript. If you want to dive right into it with me please follow me using any of my links below. I would appreciate it if you could share this post as well. The sharing options are a bit closer down below!
